Metadata File for Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve, Waquoit, MA (October 
1995-December 1995)
Latest Update: December 16, 1999

I. Data set and Research Descriptors
1. Principal investigator and contact person Richard E. Crawford, Ph.D.
Research Coordinator
PO Box 3092
Waquoit, MA 02536
508-457-0495 extension 105
wbnerr@capecod.net

2. Entry verification:
The data are uploaded in three file formats (each to separate files identified with the same file 
name but with unique extensions) from the YSI 6000 data logger to a PC with the YSI 6000 
data transfer software (Kermit). Two of these (PC6000 and ASCII text formats) are kept on 
file in the WBNERR archive. The comma delimited format data file is imported to the 
EXCEL spreadsheet program (version 5.0) where it is processed according to standard NERRS 
CDMO protocol using the CDMO Excel 5.0 macros. File size of one complete month of data 
each has been achieved by concatenating (and truncating if necessary) shorter files of 
interrupted data segments. File contents are examined for anomalies (e.g., sensor 
malfunction, battery failure, spurious values, etc.) by visualization of data with the program 
GRAPHER (ver. 1.3). Data requiring editing are noted and copies of the graphs of raw data 
are saved at WBNERR. Data editing to CDMO protocol is conducted in EXCEL. Missing data 
(data logger malfunction or maintenance periods) are represented by periods ("."). Outliers 
(data values not within the design range of the respective sensors except for turbidity and 
depth) are changed to periods. Data values recorded during deployment or retrieval (i.e., when 
the instrument was out of the water or in the laboratory) are also changed to periods. A 
record of changes is documented in the Data Anomalies section of the metadata file. 

The monthly files are sent electronically by FTP to CDMO. Copies of all files are retained at 
the reserve. 

3. Research Objectives:
The primary issue of concern for the Waquoit Bay ecosystem is the influence of 
anthropogenic induced alterations by nitrogen enrichment. Waquoit Bay receives nitrogen 
from several sources, such as septic systems (their leachate percolates into groundwater which 
then enters the bay), run off from roads, run off containing domestic and agricultural 
fertilizer and animal waste, and atmospheric sources. This elevated nitrogen loading to the 
bay has resulted in eutrophic conditions that have contributed to alterations of habitats in the 
bay. For example, thick mats of seaweeds now cover the bottom where eelgrass meadows 
thrived in the 1970's. Unfortunately, there are few definitive records of bay conditions during 
that period, which makes it difficult to evaluate the rates of change. To facilitate future 
evaluation, long-term records from data loggers are being compiled to track several 
parameters that describe conditions in this eutrophic system. Of particular interest are 
measurements of dissolved oxygen and turbidity. These long-term records will facilitate 
evaluation of changes which may come about from a continuation of watershed alteration 
that result from "traditional" development (i.e., non-sewered residential areas served by 
private septic systems typically consisting of septic tanks and leach fields) as well as non-
industrial commercial development, such as golf courses, cranberry bogs, and "mini shopping 
malls". The records will be useful for evaluating the efficacy of remediation efforts intended 
to reduce the nitrogen loading from these sources to Waquoit Bay. 

One data logger, considered the "baseline" unit, is located in central Waquoit Bay at latitude 
41 o 34' 00" N, longitude 70 o 31' 47" W. Logger sensors are 0.75 m above the bottom. The 
site has depths that typically range between 1.8 m to 2.5 m during a tide. It is well flushed by 
tidal currents, is sufficiently exposed to all points of the wind (i.e., only minimally influenced 
by shoreline features), and is adequately removed from the navigation channel to be 
minimally affected by boating activities. Data from this unit are considered to represent 
ambient environmental conditions within the bay at the time of a sample. 

A second data logger, with sensors also 0.75 m above the bottom, is located in a slightly 
deeper basin (2.3 - 3.0 m) at the head of Waquoit Bay. More than 200 boat moorings are in 
this basin. During the last decade, there have been fish kills in this area, as evidenced by 
sightings of dead and dying fish and shellfish along the basin's shore. Preliminary data suggest 
that low concentrations of dissolved oxygen that occur near dawn (daybreak hypoxia) are the 
cause. Oxygen levels in the bay are the lowest each day at dawn due to respiration by biota in 
the bay, particularly the copious quantity of seaweeds that have become exceedingly abundant 
due to nitrogen loading. On most days sufficient sunlight for photosynthesis usually reaches 
the bottom of the shallow bay and dissolved oxygen concentrations increase quickly after 
sunrise. However, if fog sufficiently reduces insolation, oxygen production by photosynthesis 
may be severely limited. If such conditions persist, fish (e.g., juvenile winter flounder, 
Pleuronectes americanus) and shellfish (e.g., bay scallop, Argopectin irradians) may be killed 
due to inadequate oxygen. Data from the northern and central basins and the WBNERR 
meteorological station will help us learn about the scale and dynamics of these events and 
their frequency of occurrence.

Another parameter of direct interest at WBNERR is turbidity. Since the mid 1970's, the 
major primary producer of the Waquoit Bay ecosystem has shifted from eelgrass to 
macroalgae. The seaweed dominated system relies on the energy subsidy of eutrophication (in 
this case nitrogen) to sustain its prolific productivity. But it has been hypothesized that 
eventually, shifts in trophic energy flow through the "artificially sustained" ecosystem will 
alter the delicate equilibrium that supports the proliferation of seaweeds. This may result in 
an increase in phytoplankton abundance which would decreases the amount of light reaching 
the benthic algae, causing it to die. This would release nutrients that would further fuel the 
growth of phytoplankton until the system is no longer dominated by seaweed. An increase in 
phytoplankton concentration would result in an increase in ambient turbidity levels that 
would be detectable by moored data logger instruments. Thus, long-term records of turbidity 
will be extremely valuable should such a scenario occur. However, this important parameter is 
also affected by weather (wind and rain), land use, hydrography, and boating. Understanding 
how these variables influence turbidity is a topic of ongoing research by staff at the reserve.

4. Research methods
There are two sampling sites. One is in the central portion of the bay and is considered to 
provide baseline measurements of "ambient" conditions. A second data logger is deployed in 
the mooring basin at the head of Waquoit Bay. This logger monitors the dynamics of 
daybreak hypoxia that is prevalent in this area of the bay.

The data loggers at the two sites in Waquoit Bay record measurements of temperature, 
specific conductivity, salinity, dissolved oxygen, turbidity, water level, and pH at thirty 
minute intervals during deployment periods of roughly two weeks. The sampling season is 
generally from March to December. However, this is dependent on weather, the amount of 
ice on the bay, and the operational availability of the boat that serves as tender for the 
loggers.

Each PC6000 data logger is anchored with a 75 pound mooring to which two lines are 
attached. One line is for a surface float that marks the location. The other line is shorter and 
terminates at a smaller float; line length is such that the float remains submerged throughout 
tidal changes. The data logger is attached to this line in a vertical manner so that the sensors 
(pointing downward) are suspended 75 cm from the bottom. This system was chosen to 
minimize opportunities for vandalism. Unfortunately, because the data logger tender is small, 
handling the weight of the mooring can exceed the limits of safety for data logger 
deployment/retrieval operations on windy days. As such, data logger field operations are 
limited to "fair weather". This contingency may result in interruptions in data collection that 
exceed those required for routine maintenance and calibration schedules, particularly when 
staffing levels are low. 

During colder months, continuous operations are limited to about two weeks due to limited 
battery life. In the warmer months, particularly June - September, biofouling of the sensors 
also limits continuous operation to about two weeks even though battery performance during 
this period would allow longer deployments. 

After a deployment, each logger is brought back to the laboratory for post calibration check, 
data downloading, instrument and sensor cleaning, and calibration. These procedures are 
carried out according to the methods described in the YSI Operating Manual. Salinity sensors 
were calibrated with reference seawater that had been previously analyzed with a Guildline 
salinometer at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Oxygen calibration was performed 
with the aid of a laboratory grade barometer. pH sensors were calibrated with 7.0 and 10.0 pH 
standard solutions (2-point calibrations). Turbidity standard solutions were prepared from 
formazin dilutions that were checked with a LaMotte Model 600 turbidity meter (calibrated 
with a 2-point calibration using LaMotte turbidity standards). Temperature sensors were not 
calibrated. 

During the summer months, oxygen membranes were changed during each maintenance 
period (an operation so noted in metadata file Section 13). During colder months, when 
biofouling is less of a concern, membranes may have been used for two deployments. When 
membranes were reused, they were cleaned with the water jet from a Water Pick dental 
instrument. If a membrane was replaced, calibration was not done until the membrane had 
been in place for at least 24 hours. Final calibration was done immediately prior to 
instrument deployment.

5.	Site location and character:
The Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve (WBNERR) is located in the 
northeastern United States on the southern shore of Cape Cod, Massachusetts. About 8,000 
people maintain permanent residency in Waquoit Bay's drainage area, which covers parts of 
the towns of Falmouth, Mashpee, and Sandwich. During summer months, the population 
swells 2-3 fold. 

WBNERR is representative of shallow coastal lagoons that occur from Cape Cod to Sandy 
Hook, New Jersey. WBNERR is within the Virginian biogeographic province, on the 
transitional border (Cape Cod) between the Virginian and the more northern Acadian 
biogeographic province. 

Like many embayments located on glacial outwash plains, Waquoit Bay is shallow, fronted by 
prominent barrier beaches (i.e., those of South Cape Beach State Park and Washburn Island), 
and is backed by salt marshes and upland forests. Two narrow, navigable inlets, reinforced 
with granite jetties, have been constructed through two barrier beaches to connect Waquoit 
Bay with Nantucket Sound to the south. A third shallow and generally unnavigable inlet 
opened through the Washburn Island barrier beach during Hurricane Bob in August 1991. It 
has not been reinforced and its fate remains uncertain. 

The eastern shore of uninhabited Washburn Island, with its low, steep bluffs and forested 
uplands, forms the western boundary of the reserve. However, tidal waters enter and leave the 
bay proper (and the Reserve) via the so-called Seapit and Eel rivers, which funnel tidal flows 
along the western shore of Washburn Island, through Eel Pond and ultimately to Nantucket 
Sound. 

Dense housing developments cover the two peninsulas that form the western shore of the 
two rivers. Although the developments are outside of the Reserve boundaries, nitrogen in 
discharges from their septic systems (which flows ultimately into the bay via groundwater) 
and in fertilizer run-off from their lawns has significant effects on the functioning of the 
Waquoit Bay ecosystem complex. The impacts of these effects have been a subject of study 
at the Reserve since its designation (1988). An outcome of this research has been the 
delineation of subwatersheds within the overall drainage area for Waquoit Bay, of which 
WBNERR is a small part. This knowledge allows robust experimental designs (e.g., 
substitution of space for time) which augment results from work done within and near to the 
Reserve. 

At the northern end of the Bay, an area comprising a separate subwatershed, coastal bluffs of 
glacial till rise 30 feet above sea level, the highest land within the Reserve. Adjacent to the 
bluffs, the northern basin of the bay is its deepest area (2.3 m mean low water), albeit much 
of the remainder of the bay is only slightly shallower (roughly 1.6 m). The NB data logger is 
located within this basin. Bourne, Bog, and Caleb ponds are freshwater kettle hole ponds on 
the northern-most shore of the bay. As components of the same sub-watershed, they have a 
common albeit minor freshwater outflow into the bay's northern basin via a narrow channel 
through a brackish marsh. Although this flow is small, over the centuries it has created a 
significant delta of coarse sand that overlies much finer sediments found at comparable 
offshore distances elsewhere. The source of this sand is the sandy beach through which this 
fresh water discharge must travel. 

To the east and south, land in other subwatersheds surrounds several salt and freshwater 
ponds, including Hamblin and Jehu Ponds, brackish salt ponds that are connected to the Bay 
by the tidal waters of Little and Great rivers, respectively. The shorelines of the ponds are 
developed with residences that are occupied both seasonally and year round. Hamblin Pond 
and Little River are components of one subwatershed, and Jehu Pond and Great River are 
elements of a separate subwatershed. Further south lies Sage Lot Pond. It is in the least 
developed subwatershed which also contains the barrier beach and salt marsh ecosystem of the 
reserve's South Cape Beach State Park. To the east of Sage Lot Pond and within the same 
subwatershed, lies the highly brackish Flat Pond. It receives minimal tidal flows of salt water 
from Sage Lot Pond through a narrow, excavated channel. The preponderance of the input 
to Flat Pond is groundwater and run off, both of which are likely affected (e.g., nutrients, 
pesticides, bacteria) by an adjacent golf course and near-by upper-scale residential 
development.

The largest source of freshwater to Waquoit Bay is the Quashnet/Moonakis River. (Although 
named "river", this and the reserve's Childs River are more appropriately described as 
"rivulets".) A component of yet another subwatershed, it originates in Johns Pond situated 
north of the bay and traverses forests, cranberry bogs, residential areas, and the Quashnet 
Valley Golf Course before entering the bay near the southern "boundary" of the northern 
basin. ("Quashnet" applies to that portion of the river within the town of Mashpee, and 
"Moonakis" refers to the brackish estuary at the river's mouth, lying in the town of 
Falmouth. Quashnet will be used hereafter to refer to the entire river.) Although the "baseline 
" data logger is roughly in the middle of the bay, it is also in the course of the discharge plume 
of the river. The plume is only detectable by the CB data logger during high water flows. The 
Quashnet River is the only component of the Waquoit Bay estuary system that has sufficient 
numbers of coliform bacteria to cause it to be closed to shellfishing. The source(s) of this 
bacteria is unknown. The Quashnet River delivers significantly less nitrogen to Waquoit Bay 
than does the Childs River, which lies to the west and originates in Johns Pond. 

The Childs River is the second largest input of freshwater to the Bay. A component of 
another subwatershed, it runs through densely developed residential areas. The Childs River 
subwatershed receives the highest nitrogen loading and is the largest nitrogen contributor to 
the Waquoit Bay system of all the subwatersheds.

Another, albeit smaller, source of freshwater is the discharge of Red Brook through brackish 
marshlands into Hamblin Pond. Additional freshwater enters the bay elsewhere through 
groundwater seepage, precipitation and the flows of small brooks. A significant groundwater 
flow enters the eastern end of the mooring basin at the head of the bay. There is relatively 
little surface water runoff entering directly into the bay due to the high percolation rates of 
Cape Cod's coarse, sandy soils. 

Data loggers are located at two sites in Waquoit Bay. Site 1 (identified as "Central Basin" or 
CB) is located at 41o 34' 00" N, longitude 70 o 31' 47" W. It is the reference site for the 
WBNERR data logger water quality monitoring program. An instrument will be moored at 
this site for the long term in order to collect baseline measurement of "ambient" conditions 
within Waquoit Bay. This information will be considered to represent an integration of the 
general conditions within the bay. The site is well flushed by tides, is 1.8-2.5 m deep, and is in 
an area that is minimally disturbed by routine activities on the bay (e.g. boat traffic, 
shellfishing, etc.). The Central Basin region was once covered by eelgrass (Zostera marina). 
This plant that has all but disappeared from the bay in the last two decades and has been 
replaced by seaweed, predominantly Cladophora vagabunda, Gracilaria tikvahiayae, and 
Enteromorpha sp.. The CB site is southwest of the mouth of the Quashnet River. The 
stream's freshwater discharge into Waquoit Bay is typically 5-10 ft3 /s. The resultant 
discharge plume at these low flows has an undetectable influence on salinity at the CB site. 
However, unusually high precipitation events or occasional releases of impounded water at an 
upstream cranberry bog can significantly increase flow to > 30 ft3 /s. The stream's discharge 
plume from these events results in slight reductions in salinity at CB. High precipitation is 
most common in the spring although summer and fall are when rains from tropical 
disturbances may occur. Discharges from cranberry bogs typically occur in the fall (harvest 
time) and after the coldest periods of winter; they are likely to be brief events.

A second data logger is deployed in the basin at the head of Waquoit Bay (Northern Basin or 
NB), at latitude 41 o 34' 44" N, longitude 70 o 31' 58" W. The basin is slightly deeper (2.3 - 
3.0 m) and less mixed than the central basin reference site (CB). Knowledge of the degree of 
mixing at the two sites was originally derived from measurements made by reserve staff (CB 
site) and from data obtained by the reserve's volunteer water quality monitoring group the 
Waquoit BayWatchers who have collected depth profiles of Waquoit Bay water quality since 
1993. The NB data logger, with sensors at 0.75 m above the bottom, monitors the hourly, 
daily, weekly, and seasonal dynamics of daybreak hypoxia that is prevalent in this area of the 
bay. 

6. Data collection period
Data collection in the central and northern basin of Waquoit Bay began October 11, 1995 
and continued until December 15, 1995.

7. Associated researchers and projects
None to report.

8. Variable sequence, range of measurements, units, resolution, and accuracy: 

YSI 6000 datalogger

Variable Name Range of Measurements(units) Resolution	Accuracy
Date	1-12, 1-31, 00-99 (Mo,Day,Yr) 1 month, 1 day, 1 year NA
Time	0-24, 0-60, 0-60 (Hr, Min, Sec) 1 hr, 1 min, 1s	NA
Temp	-5 to 45	0.01 C	+/-0.15C
SpCOND	0-100 (mS/cm)	0.01mS/cm	+/-0.5% of reading +
0.001 mS/cm
Salinity	0-70 Parts per thousand (ppt) 0.01ppt	+/-1.0% of reading
or 0.1 ppt (whichever is greater)
DO	0-200 (% air Saturation)	0.1% @air saturation	+/-2% @air sat.
DO	200-500 (% air Saturation) 0.1% @air saturation	+/-6% @air sat.
DO	0-20 (mg/l)	0.01mg/l	+/-0.2mg/l
DO	20-50 (mg/l)	0.01mg/l	+/-0.6mg/l
Depth (shallow) 0-9.1 (m)	0.001m	+/-0.018m
pH	2-14 units	0.01units	+/-0.2units
Turb	0-1000 NTU	0.1NTU	+/-5% of reading
or 2 NTU (whichever is greater)
Data columns are separated by tabs.


9.	Coded variable indicator and variable code definitions
The file names are labeled according to site identifier code, month, year (e.g., cb1095). 
Identifier codes are: nb = northern basin site in Waquoit Bay, cb = central basin site in 
Waquoit Bay. The central basin site is the sp-called "reference" site.

10.	Data anomalies
The instruments were not considered operational at WBNERR until October 11, 1995. 
Review of data sets from the first three months of instrument use revealed that not all 
sensors were consistently fully operational due to improper calibration and/or equipment set 
up. When data values were clearly wrong they were discarded. Also, loggers occasionally took 
readings during transport to or from the mooring site. These values, as well as those obtained 
when the instruments were in the lab, were discarded. 

During all three months, the dissolved oxygen values from the Central Basin data logger were 
occasionally higher than expected, given our understanding of the study sites at the time. 
This unexpected result is discussed in section 13.

There are several unexplainable spikes in the CB oxygen data. The amplitude of these spikes 
is insufficient to render them as "outliers" but the cause of this instability in the data is 
considered to be unlikely of biological origin (bubbles in the sensor?). These data have been 
retained. 

For the remaining variables in the data sets, the anomaly record is as follows: 

October 1995:
Dissolved oxygen data (both concentration and saturation) during 10/11/95 14:00:00 to 
16:30:00 were inexplicably high (actually increased until 16:30:00 when sunlight was 
diminishing and oxygen concentrations ought to have been following suit). At 17:00:00 
oxygen levels precipitously declined to values that were typical for that time of day 
throughout the remainder of the month (10.5 mg/l or 135 % saturation). Because sensor 
response was normal after 17:00:00, problem was attributed to a temporary condition that 
caused a malfunction for the first few hours of data logging. Affected data were discarded. Ph 
values during 10/11/95 14:00:00 to 10/12/95 06:30:00 were inexplicably low. The problem 
was 
apparently temporary because sensor output eventually exhibited "normal" behavior after a 
"start up" period of instability. Sensor output during this time was judged to be meaningless 
and data were discarded. Data collected after instability ceased were retained. 

November 1995: none to report

December 1995:
Central Basin:
Specific conductivity and salinity data for the entire month were erroneous due to improper 
calibration 
of the sensor. The data were meaningless and were discarded. 
North Basin:
Specific conductivity and salinity data for the entire month were erroneous due to improper 
calibration 
of the sensor. The data were meaningless and were discarded.
11.	Missing data
No turbidity probes were available for the year 1995.  Therefore, no turbidity was collected.  

October 1995:
Central Basin
No data until 10/11/95 13:30:00 when logger was placed in service. No Ph data from 
10/11/95 14:00:00 to 10/12/95 06:30:00 due to sensor instability during this period. 
Dissolved oxygen data (both concentration and saturation) during 10/11/95 14:00:00 to 
16:30:00 were inexplicably high (sensor malfunction) and were discarded. Logger was returned 
to lab for servicing at 10/31/95 16:00:00; data for the month ended then. No salinity data
10/11 1400-1630.

North Basin
No data until 10/11/95 14:00:00 when logger was placed in service. No pH data for the entire 
month due to sensor malfunction. 
No data after 10/31/95 16:00:00 when the instrument was removed for servicing. 

November 1995:
The data loggers were kept in the laboratory until November 13. During this time reserve 
personnel received factory supported training and the instruments received a thorough 
calibration check. The loggers were redeployed on November 13.
Central Basin:
No data until 11/13/95 16:30:00 when logger was deployed. 
No data after 11/27/95 08:30:00 when logger was removed for servicing. 

North Basin:
No data until 11/13/95 16:00:00 when logger was deployed. 
No data after 11/27/95 09:00:00 when logger was removed for servicing. 

December 1995:
Central Basin:
Specific conductivity and salinity data were discarded due to improper calibration of sensor. 
No data after 12/15/95 09:30:00 when instrument was pulled for the winter due to ice in 
Waquoit Bay (it was freezing over).

North Basin:
Specific conductivity and salinity data were discarded due to improper calibration of sensor. 
No data after 12/15/95 09:30:00 when instrument was pulled for the winter due to ice in 
Waquoit Bay (it was freezing over).

12.	Other remarks/notes
A surprising finding from this initial deployment is the larger variability in the diel changes of 
dissolved oxygen levels in the Central Basin (CB). It was assumed that because the Northern 
Basin (NB) was less well mixed than CB, oxygen levels at logger depth would change more at 
NB during the course of a 24 hour period. The opposite was the case. This was considered to 
be a result of the greater volume of water in the north basin area which provided a larger 
reservoir of dissolved oxygen than was available at the CB location. As a result, diel oxygen 
flux was greater at CB. 

It has subsequently been learned (in 1998) that a persistent lateral front exists in the vicinity 
of the CB mooring site. This front is apparently due to current flow patterns in the Waquoit 
Bay estuary. Salinity and temperature values may vary several units across the front. Wind 
forcing and tidal forces influence the position of the front and it may migrate through the CB 
deployment area several times during a month. This causes variation within the "reference" 
data set that may otherwise be unexplained.
